---
layout: post
title:  "OMOP & FHIR"
date:   2023-03-17 12:30:00
author: Daniel Cotter
categories: jekyll update
---

Health interoperability is a broad topic that spans many technologies and protocols. Today I will 
be discussing two of those that are related but different.

# OMOP

OMOP (Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership) is a common data model (CDM) 
established by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) through the Observational Health Data 
Sciences and Informatics (OHDSI) collaborative, intended to standardize the structure and 
content of observational data. Standardization allows data to flow in from disparate sources, 
such as different electronic medical record systems (EMRs) – Epic, Cerner, Allscripts, and so on, 
but also homegrown EMRs such as that of the Veteran's Administration. In this sense, OMOP is 
not unlike a clinical data warehouse (CDW) - it plays the role of a lingua franca among database 
systems – although the intent of OMOP is to facilitate studies across multiple clinical cohorts, 
whereas a CDW would more likely be used for operational reporting.

Electronic medical records (EMRs) are intended to support clinical practice at the point of care 
and are not necessarily structured in such a way as to facilitate analysis. Two ways in which they 
do not always support analysis are the database structure and the terminologies used. The 
database structure of a transactional system (i.e., a system in which the unit of information is a 
single record, be that a patient, a visit, an order, or something else) is fundamentally different 
from that of an analytical system, in which the unit of information is many records, which will be 
used in an aggregation such as counting or summing.

Another noteworthy feature of OMOP is that the data structures in OMOP are delineated at the 
logical level, and their physical implementation, i.e., on a specific database platform, is left to 
the user. This is not uncommon when the physical implementation of the data model is 
expected to take place on a variety of different database systems (for a private-industry 
example, take IBM's Unified Data Model for Healthcare), but it contrasts with most EMRs, which 
are intended to run on one and only one platform (such as Allscripts running only on Windows).

Stanford Medicine began implementing OMOP in 2019 (arxiv manuscript) in their STARR system 
("STAnford medicine Research data Repository," a bit of a reach as acronyms go, but easier to 
say than SMRDR), and it has since been used in several papers. The data is anonymized to 
preserve patient privacy and is in a separate database system from that used by clinicians.

# FHIR
FHIR (Fast Health Interoperability Resources) is a data exchange standard for that specifies a 
set of application protocols, messaging formats, types of resources, and rules for use. The 
company that developed it, Health Level Seven, developed the industry-standard protocols HL7, 
whose various versions have been used for thirty years for exchanging health information 
between clinical systems, albeit in a terse, cryptic, closed-standard way that requires specialized 
training to interpret, configure, or troubleshoot.

FHIR is a radical break from that paradigm – the emphasis with FHIR is on openness and 
interoperability not just among clinical systems but with the broader technological landscape 
and the skills of the engineers who make the systems work. For application protocols, it adopts 
the ubiquitous HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) for data transfer and high-level application 
control and REST (Representative State Transfer) for more granular operations on the payload of 
the request, such as the familiar create / read / update / delete (CRUD) operations. For 
messaging formats, FHIR uses the familiar JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) and XML 
(eXtensible Markup Language) formats, as well as the less common RDF (Resource Description 
Framework) format. For types of resources, FHIR specifies over one hundred possible types, 
ranging from the clinical (Patient, Observation, Medication) to the financial (Claim, Coverage, 
PaymentNotice) to the ontological (CodeSystem) and technical (Bundle). These resource types 
are generic templates to be filled in with the specifics as chosen by the implementer.

FHIR also uses open standards for clinical information, such as SNOMED-CT (Systematic 
Nomenclature of Medicine), ICD (International Classification of Disease), LOINC (Logical 
Observation Identifiers Names and Codes), and so on. For usage rules, FHIR allows users to 
specify profiles that restrict the specific content of the entities being exchanged, for example, 
limiting observations to those recognized by LOINC (Logical Observation Identifiers Names and 
Codes).

# Summary
FHIR and OMOP overlap in that they both provide ways of representing typical entities 
encountered in clinical practice, but they differ in their intents. OMOP is not a standard for data 
exchange among clinical systems, and FHIR is not a logical database model, but they are 
sometimes coerced into each other's roles, with mixed results.
