---
layout: post
title: "Intro to Consortia and Biobanks"
date: 2023-03-03 15:00:00 -0500
author: Jenny Huffman
categories: genetics studies
---

# Introduction to Genetic Consortia and Biobanks
Despite last week's shade, I have decided to take the high road and write about a different topic rather than regaling you with all the the fantastic uses of R for genetic data analysis and processing of large tables of data. Instead, I am going to give a quick intro and overview of several different biobanks and genetic consortia that you have heard about or are likely to hear about in the near future.
## VA Million Veteran Program (MVP)
I thought we might as well start with the study we are all working for/with. I know many of you have worked with the data, however, I wasn't sure how much you knew about the history or research portfolio, so will give a high level overview.
MVP is the most diverse research study in the world with both clinical and genetic data. It was initiated in 2012 with the aim to enroll 1M Veterans from within the Veterans Health Administration. Within the United States, this is the only nationwide integrated healthcare system, which essentially means that all the electronic health records are harmonized, use the same record-keeping system, and accessible for research, without needing to get agreements from every hospital across the country. As well, the study design oversampled for groups under-represented in research (racial/ethnic minorities), groups under-represented in the VA (women), and would allow researchers to focus on things that impact Veterans more than the general population (impact of environmental exposures on health, stress and mental health diagnoses, etc). Also, since Veterans also get the same diseases as everyone else, MVP would allow research on cancer, cardiovascular disease, kidney disease, diabetes, etc. MVP is on track to recruit their millionth participant this year, and are actively planning for the next million.
MVP operational teams are based in Boston, MA and Washington, DC. with different groups responsible for (i) recruitment, (ii) biological sample processing and storage, (iii) research administration, (iv) phenotype data harmonization, quality control and access, and (v) 'omic data quality control, provisioning and access.
MVP research groups are spread across the country, but tend to be located in cities with large academic medical centers. Research access to MVP is availble to VA investigators only, and was initially granted through specific funding calls, but now is open to include in any VA grant call. The first few research programs started proir to genetic data availability, and was restricted to projects on topics of high interest to Veterans (PTSD, Gulf War Syndrome) who would need to recontact participants to get further information to answer their research questions. The next tranche came online around 2017, just as the first freeze of the genetic data became available, and has expanded exponentially since then. They tackled a mix of common diseases such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, chronic kidney disease, macular degeneration, and those more common in Veterans such as substance use disorders, tramatic brain injury, and tinnitus. Collaborations with the Department of Energy have brought high performance computing and expertise in advanced machine learning techniques together with clinical and genetic expertise to tackle important research areas such as the suicide risk prediction and prevention, and prediction of prostate cancer severity and progression.
For more information on the MVP study design and rational, the [initial paper](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26441289/) was published in 2016, and there is also more information about on-going study recruitment and research on the [MVP website](https://www.mvp.va.gov), and the VA Office of Research and Development (ORD) [website](https://research.va.gov/mvp/).
<br>
<br>
## Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology (CHARGE) Consortium 
The CHARGE Consortium was initiated with the advent of high throughput genotyping arrays in the mid-2000's. The PIs of five longitudinal epidemiology studies recognized that investigations into the genetic-basis of disease would require larger sample sizes then they each had individually, therefore collaboration was essential. They came up with a set of guiding principles for collaboration and initial research topics, and the rest is history. CHARGE has now expanded to include more than 50 research cohorts and 100's of researchers globally. The consortium is lead by a Research Steering Committee which includes investigators from the most engaged cohorts, and research is organized into Working Groups focusing on a specific research area. Anyone is welcome to join, propose projects, or contribute to existing and on-going work. CHARGE is supported by an [infrastucture grant](https://reporter.nih.gov/search/8c8umuzAYkqWJ8ncepn_2Q/project-details/10519686) from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) which funds an admisitrative core at the University of Washington, investigator meetings every 6-8 months, and some centralized biological sample measurement.
For more information on the CHARGE Consortium study design, you can read their [design paper](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20031568/), as well as browsing their [website](https://www.chargeconsortium.com/) and their [wiki page](http://depts.washington.edu/chargeco/wiki/Main_Page) (some portions accessibly only for those with a login).
<br>
<br>
## NHLBI's Trans-Omics for Precision Medicine (TOPMed) Program
The [TOPMed program](https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/science/trans-omics-precision-medicine-topmed-program) was initiated in 2014 by NHLBI to provide high-quality whole genome seqeuncing data to several of their long standing epidemiology studies (Amish, Framingham Heart Study, Jackson Heart Study, Women's Genome Health Study) or collaborations focusing on specific areas of interst (Atrial Fibrillation, Asthma, COPD). Several centers were responsible for Data Coordination, Informatics Research, and Sequencing. Studies would provide DNA and have early access to the WGS data, but would also be mandated to make it the WGS data publicly available via [dbGaP](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap/). Since many of the contributing studies came from CHARGE, a similar Working Group structure was established and similar guiding principles encouraged. TOPMed now consists of >85 studies and is expanding to measure other 'omics including methylomics, proteomics, and metabolomics. They are currently working on Freeze 10 of their genetic data release and have provided vital resources back to the community through development of the University of Michigan's [Imputation Server](https://imputationserver.sph.umich.edu/index.html#!), and [BRAVO variant browser](https://bravo.sph.umich.edu/freeze8/hg38/).
More information on TOPMed can be found on their [research website](https://topmed.nhlbi.nih.gov/).
<br>
<br>
## UK Biobank
[UKBiobank](https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/) was revolutionary in its vision to create a cohort of 500,000 people with genetic, questionnaire, and clinical data, that would be open access for global research. Participants were recuited from the general population of the UK, and harmonized clinical data available due to the UK's National Health Service (NHS). Genotyping was completed centrally, as well as a biochemistry panel. An initial pilot release of data from 50,000 participants was available ~2016 with the full dataset coming online in the last two years. Whole exome and whole genome sequencing is available on a subset of participants, with more planned for the future. Other omics are also in the works such as metabolomics and proteomics. Data access is now provided through a centralized analysis platform, in order to improve access for researchers and data security.
<br>
<br>
## All of Us (AOU) Program
[AOU](https://allofus.nih.gov/) is funded by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) and is an answer to the UK Biobank. Its focus is to recruit a large cohort of people who are underrepresented in research, to collect questionnaire, clinical, and genetic data, and to make this all fully available to the public (academic researchers, government researchers, citizen scientists, pharma, etc). Recruitment is ongoing and the initial tranche of phenotype and genotype data became available in the last year or so. Future plans include WGS of the entire cohort and more informtion on available data, etc can be found on their [Research Hub](https://www.researchallofus.org/). So far, data access is only available to people within the United States.
<br>
<br>
<br>
### This is just a flavor of the genetic research landscape, and is definitely US-centric so future posts will look more globally.

# Discuss
Discuss this blog post on our [GitHub](https://github.com/orgs/va-big-data-genomics/discussions/9)!
